---
title: How to create downloadable executables for your project with GitHub actions
author: Justus Adam
---

With the release of [GitHub Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions) we have
gained an incredibly powerful tool when it comes to testing and publishing
software hosted on GitHub. Actions lets you essentially perform arbitrary
computing tasks whenever certain events in your repository are triggered. While
platforms like Circle-CI or Travis have offered similar capabilities for a
while, Actions make some of those tasks significantly more convenient due to how
deeply it is integrated with GitHub.

What I want to show you in this post is how you can provide downloadable
compiled binaries and tarballs for users of your projects using just a few lines
of Actions configuration. Having prebuilt binaries like this makes it
significantly easier for new users to check out and start using your project,
especially those less familiar with the language and tooling you use.

In this post I will be describing a project written in
[Haskell](https://haskell.org) and built using
[stack](https://docs.haskellstack.org). However except for the build commands
none of the configuration is unique to this toolchain and you should be able to
easily adapt it to your own build method.

I've created a test repo to tinker with this stuff which you can find
[here](https://github.com/JustusAdam/create-haskell-binaries-with-actions).
There you can find the configuration I describe below, as well as see the
uploaded assets on the releases page.

If you just want to see the configuration I use and figure the rest out for
yourself, take a look at the section [Configuration](#configuration). [After
that](#explanation) I'll explain in more detail the individual steps taken in
the configuration and I'll close with some [Caveats](#caveats) that apply to
this method.

The next section is about my motivation for getting involved with this and
writing this post. If you are only here for the technical stuff you can safely
[skip it](#configuration).

## Motivation

I recently found myself wanting to check out a project called
[gitit](https://github.com/jgm/gitit) which is essentially a small server that
serves a wiki. All the wiki really is is a git repository of files with support
for several formats, such as markdown. The server lets you view, create and edit
the files in the browser and persists your changes by committing. Its a nice,
simple piece of software, especially because the stored data can easily be
handled outside of the server, making it easy to migrate or interact with from
an editor.

What I found rather annoying is that, given the features, this piece of software
should be a simple, small binary with perhaps a few static assets. And it is.
However the only method available for acquisition is building from source. Now
ðŸ’š Haskell, **but** it is notorious for its slow build times. To make matters
worse, `gitit`, in order to support multiple file formats, depends the library
version of a software called [`pandoc`](https://pandoc.org), which is a large,
multi-format document rendering and conversion software. This means to build
`gitit` the large `pandoc` software has to be built, pulling in and building all
of its many dependencies. If I remember correctly a total of around 120 Haskell
libraries were downloaded and built, which took over 30 minutes on a quad core
machine, just to make this simple, tiny 40mb binary. Not to mention that someone
who doesn't have Haskell installed would also have to download the build tools
`ghc`, `stack`, `cabal` etc.

Given how scary and involved this process is and how obscure Haskell as a
language is I feel that this simple software would be significantly more
accessible to people if it provided prebuilt binaries that one would just have
to download and run. Takes but a few seconds and avoids having to explain the
build process. And since the project is already using GitHub Actions as CI,
adding another config to build assets on release seems like a pretty
straightforward addition.

Back in the day I used to so similar things on Travis, building and uploading
binaries. Back then it required you to create a custom API key for interacting
with the GitHub releases and storing that in Travis as well as properly talking
to the GitHub API to upload stuff. It may be a bit much to ask of authors to set
up travis and the keys etc, etc. But since Actions needs none of that I feel
it's low-effort enough for virtually anyone to just start using it. Hence this
call to ... Actions ðŸ˜œ

If you're interested, my PR with the changes to the gitit workflows can be found
[here](https://github.com/jgm/gitit/pull/662).

## Configuration

{% highlight yaml %}
{% raw %}
name: Create Assets

on:
  release:
    types: [published]
    
jobs:
  build:
    runs-on: ${{ matrix.os }}
    strategy:
      matrix:
        os: [ubuntu-latest, macos-latest]

    steps:
    - uses: actions/checkout@v2
      
    - name: Cache programs and libraries
      uses: actions/cache@v2
      env:
        cache-name: cache-tools-and-libraries
      with:
        path: ~/.stack
        key: ${{ runner.os }}-ca-${{ env.cache-name }}-${{ hashFiles('**/stack.yaml.lock') }}
        restore-keys: |
          ${{ runner.os }}-ca-${{ env.cache-name }}-
          ${{ runner.os }}-ca-
          ${{ runner.os }}-

    - name: Build the project
      run: stack build
        
    - name: Tar and strip the binary
      run: |
        export PROGRAM=chbwa
        cp `stack exec -- which $PROGRAM` $PROGRAM
        tar -cavf program.tar.gz $PROGRAM
        
    - name: Upload assets
      id: upload-release-asset 
      uses: actions/upload-release-asset@v1
      env:
        GITHUB_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
      with:
        upload_url: ${{ github.event.release.upload_url }}
        asset_path: ./program.tar.gz
        asset_name: program-${{ runner.os }}.tar.gz
        asset_content_type: application/tar.gz
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}

## Explanation

### Header and build config

{% highlight yaml %}
{% raw %}
name: Create Assets

on:
  release:
    types: [published]
    
jobs:
  build:
    runs-on: ${{ matrix.os }}
    strategy:
      matrix:
        os: [ubuntu-latest, macos-latest]
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}

Standard header. We name the workflow and configure the trigger using the `on`
clause. While you can choose several triggers, you can only upload assets for
releases. If another event were to trigger the workflow the upload url used
later in the configuration would be missing.

We configure to run on all platforms available to github[^1] using the
[`matrix`](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/configuring-and-managing-workflows/configuring-a-workflow#configuring-a-build-matrix).
**Important:** GitHub also offers builds on Windows, but I haven't yet
translated the `steps` to the shell used on windows. I know how to include
platform-dependent steps in the config, but I'm not familiar enough with the
Windows shell to translate the commands. If you know what these commands would
look like on Windows, [let me know](mailto:dev@justus.science).

[^1]: Not quite true, we only run on their latest versions. You can run on more
    versions, but I haven't yet discovered how to get the version identifier during
    the build to include in the asset name.

### Checkout 

{% highlight yaml %}
    steps:
    - uses: actions/checkout@v2
{% endhighlight %}

The steps list the various commands we'd like to run. They can either call on
actions (`uses` key) or sun shell commands (`run` key). This action here [checks
out the repo](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/configuring-and-managing-workflows/configuring-a-workflow#using-the-checkout-action).

### [Caching](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/configuring-and-managing-workflows/caching-dependencies-to-speed-up-workflows)

{% highlight yaml %}
{% raw %}
    - name: Cache programs and libraries
      uses: actions/cache@v2
      env:
        cache-name: cache-tools-and-libraries
      with:
        path: ~/.stack
        key: ${{ runner.os }}-ca-${{ env.cache-name }}-${{ hashFiles('**/stack.yaml.lock') }}
        restore-keys: |
          ${{ runner.os }}-ca-${{ env.cache-name }}-
          ${{ runner.os }}-ca-
          ${{ runner.os }}-
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}

I've left this in here, but I'm sad to say it doesn't work for me. For some
reason the key lookup always fails. If anyone has an idea why [let me
know](mailto:dev@justus.science).

### Building

{% highlight yaml %}
    - name: Build the project
      run: stack build
        
    - name: Tar and strip the binary
      run: |
        export PROGRAM=chbwa
        cp `stack exec -- which $PROGRAM` $PROGRAM
        tar -cavf program.tar.gz $PROGRAM
{% endhighlight %}

Build the project the usual way.

If you have additional assets you need to distribute with your executable I
recommend packaging it as a archive here. This reduces the download times.

### Dealing with `data-files` (Haskell specific)

Some Haskell libraries and executables rely on additional `data-files` and the
`Paths_package_name` module, [managed by cabal][data-dirs]. **If you get an
error that a certain file could not be opened when running the binary you
uploaded as a asset, this is likely the reason.** Especially if the path is
something like `/home/runner/.stack/snapshots/<a long hash
value>/package-1.0.5/...`.

[data-dirs]: https://cabal.readthedocs.io/en/3.4/cabal-package.html#accessing-data-files-from-package-code

There are two components to fixing this error.

1. You must identify the files to include and
2. Overwrite the paths cabal has baked into the program

I describe how to do both of those shortly, but you may also like to look at
[this gist](https://gist.github.com/JustusAdam/5904249d909e975edb612e5eea581ba1)
which is a Haskell script that does both and copies the files to a directory
(`vendor-data/package-name`).

#### 1. Finding assets

If the missing assets are from your project itself you can skip this step and
move on.

When stack or cabal was building your project it will have stored asset files of
all libraries and `ghc-pkg` knows where. To find the data directory of a library
(say `filestore`) use the command `ghc-pkg field filestore data-dir`. If you are
using stack you should prepend `stack exec --` before this command to make sure
you query the correct package database. This returns a string of the form
`"data-dir: /home/user/...\n"`. So you need to strip off the `"data-dir: "`
prefix, as well as the trailing `\n`.

#### 1. Overwriting cabal paths

Libraries that use the `data-dir` functionality interact with is typically using
the `Paths_<package name>` generated module. You can overwrite any paths set in
this module using environment variables. For instance, if I wanted to set the
`data-file` path for the `filestore` package to `"foo/bar"`, I have to set the
variable `filestore_datadir=foo/bar`. This is documented [here][data-dirs] in
the cabal manual.

My solution for doing this automatically ist to not directly call the compiled
binary, but instead providing a shell script that sets these variables before
calling the actual program, forwarding any arguments. You can see an example of
such a script
[here](https://github.com/JustusAdam/gitit/blob/4e5e522c673411eba4c02ec33dcf5528cdcb4312/unix-proxy.sh).

### Upload

{% highlight yaml %}
{% raw %}
    - name: Upload assets
      id: upload-release-asset 
      uses: actions/upload-release-asset@v1
      env:
        GITHUB_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
      with:
        upload_url: ${{ github.event.release.upload_url }}
        asset_path: ./program.tar.gz
        asset_name: program-${{ runner.os }}.tar.gz
        asset_content_type: application/tar.gz
{% endraw %}
{% endhighlight %}

This is where the convenience of Actions really comes in. We can use the
predefined
[`upload-release-asset`](https://github.com/actions/upload-release-asset) action
which will deal with talking to the the GitHub API for us. In addition we have
access to the `secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN` which is used to authenticate the upload
request. We do not need to request the token, it is already there in every
Actions run.

You can call this action several times in your workflow config if you need to
upload more than one asset per build, for instance if you compile several
binaries with more or fewer features.

To note here is that you should make sure the asset name is unique to the build
(bu including information such as the OS) or it will clash with assets uploaded
from other runs of our matrix.

## Caveats

By running on the GitHub infrastructure the platforms and OS versions for which
you can build these binaries is limited to whatever GitHub has to offer. However
since these encompass the most common OS'es found out there I think it is worth
the effort, especially for smaller projects that are unable to afford their own
build servers.